# Lesson 8.6

### Lesson Duration: 3 hours

> Purpose: To introduce Unsupervised Learning and especifically clustering - with its main use cases and its most popular algorithm, K-Means.

---

### Learning Objectives: 
After this lesson, students will be able to: 

- Explain what UL means in a technical interview
- Understand the intuition behind K-Means
- Perform a basic clustering task
--- 

---

### Teacher material: 
To prepare and give this lesson, you can use: 

- This dataquest tutorial: https://www.dataquest.io/blog/web-scraping-beautifulsoup/

--- 


### Lesson 1 key concepts
> :clock10: 20 min

- Unsupervised learning

<details>
<summary> Web scraping multiple pages </summary>

**What is Unsupervised Learning:**
Most of the time, when we discuss Machine Learning, we talk about Supervised Learning: trying to predict a target variable. Linear and logistic regression, Decision Trees, Random Forests and Boosting methods... they all need a target variable to operate. When we don't have a target variable, we are in the domain of Unsupervised Learning.

If we're not predicting a target variable, what are we doing? We can try to understand the relationships between the features or between the observations in our dataset - discover, perhaps underlying patterns and multivariate relationships that go beyond what humans can spot doing a basic Exploratory Data Analysis.

It's called Unsupervised learning because we do not have a clear way to tell whether the algorithm is doing well or not - in SL, predictions can be compared with true values (labels) - here there are no performance metrics with which to supervise the task.

**Clustering:**
The most popular task in UL is Clustering. It's popular in the business world because companies usually have big, unlabeled datasets of customers - and they need to segment those customers in order to make effective decisions: understanding their behaviour, sending targeted emails, offering loyalty promotions, tailoring new products, etc. Clustering algorithms do precisely that: they find groups of observations (customers, in this exmample) in such a way that the observations a group are as similar as possible to each other, but the groups are as different as possible from each other.

**Clustering vs. Traditional Segmentation:**
Traditionally, subject experts were the ones creating the segmentation: maybe they had some data showing that, in general, customers under and over 25 years old behave differently, and that gender is a clear divide when it comes to shopping. Rich datasets and clustering algorithms can challenge these traditional segmentations. If an e-commerce site has click-through rates in multiple stages of the marketing funnel, email-opening rates and a history of products searched, added to a wish list and purchased (each divided in a few variables by category of product), it's much more difficult to use "instinct", business expertise or a couple of bar charts to segment ytheour customers. However, clustering algorithms can find groups of customers that are similar based on these behavioural variables.

**Other Unsupervised Learning tasks:**

- *Principal Component Analysis:* PCA is a method that takes a dataset with *p* features that are assumed to be somewhat correlated and produces *p* new features, called Principal Components, ordered in such a way that the first few Principal Components explain most of the variability in the dataset. This particularity means that the last Principal Components can be completely discarded - hence reducing the dimensionality of the dataset. This outcome can be used either for being exploring the dataset or for improving the performance and training time of predictive algorithms - at the cost of losing interpretability.

Other Unsupervised tasks and methods include 

- *Anomaly detection*: using algorithms such as the Local Outlier Factor or Gaussian Mixtures. The name of the task is pretty self explanatory: we're trying to find observations that deviate strongly from the norm. It's useful for fraud detection, detecting defective products in manufacturing or simply for removing / dealing with outliers as part of a broader ML task.

 - *Generative modelling*: using, for example, Generative Adversarial Network (GANs), the goal is to learn patterns of input data in such a way that the model can be used to generate new observations that plausibly could have been drawn from the original dataset (the caveat here is that this last part of the task is evaluated with SL: we train a model to try to detect whether an observation was part of the original dataset or generated by the model).

After this overview, we will go back to clustering, since it's what we were asked to do in our project.



**xxxxx:**
</details>



:coffee: __BREAK__

---

#### :pencil2: Check for Understanding - Class activity/quick quiz
> :clock10: 15 min (+ 20 min Review)

<details>
  <summary> Click for Instructions: Activity 1 </summary>
  
Watch this video on K-means clustering from StatQuest: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4b5d3muPQmA

Discuss this questions with the class:

A. What are the potential problems / risks of initializing the clusters randomly?

B. Choosing K: what if there's not a clear "elbow"? Or... what if there are 2 "elbows"?

</details>

<details>
  <summary>Click for Solution: Activity 1 solutions</summary>

Start by making sure everyone understood how K-Means works. It follows these steps:

1. Randomly assign a number, from 1 to K, to K observations. Those are going to be the initial *centroids*.

2. Assign each observation to its closest centroid (where *closest* is defined using Euclidean distance).

3. Iterate until the cluster assignments stop changing (or until you reach a pre-defined threshold):
    a) For each of the K clusters, re-compute the cluster *centroid* (the *k*th cluster centroid is the vector of the *p* feature means for the observations in the *k*th cluster).
    b) Assign each observation to the cluster whose centroid is closest 


Discuss the questions:

A. Because K-Means does not know the "optimal" centroids and has to search for them starting at random spots, you might need many iterations to be completely sure it found the best possible centroids. That makes the algorithm slow and sometimes not consistent (unless you specify a Random Seed, you might get different clusters every time you run your code). Fortunately, smart people came up with several Centroid Initialization methods that speed up the model and mitigate the risks of getting sub-optimal centroids. We'll look at them later!

B. Business requirements usually determine the acceptable range of clusters: if your marketing department wants to do a clustering task for sending different targeted campaigns, they might have budget for creating up to 5 campaigns. Even if there's a super clear elbow at K=11, good luck trying to convince them to double the efforts... The elbow plot is still useful: it might show that even if K=11 seems to be the best pick, K=4 is a better pick than K=5. This is an example of why a data scientist has to understand to the needs of the business and be able to communicate with / convince non-technical people.


</details>

---

:coffee: __BREAK__

---


### Lesson 2 key concepts
> :clock10: 20 min
- Perform a basic clustering task using dummy data

We will use a dataset about wines that's built-in into Scikit-Learn to get started with clustering.

Code along with your students:

**Data loading and preparation:**

```python

from sklearn import datasets

data = datasets.load_wine()

X = pd.DataFrame(data["data"], columns=data["feature_names"])
#y = pd.Series(data["target"])

# Comment the different variables of this dataset
# Notice how they are all numerical - KMeans cannot deal with categorical variables
X.head()

# The scale of "proline" is much higher than the scale of many other variables!
# K-Means is a distance based algorithm: we need to scale / normalize:
from sklearn.preprocessing import StandardScaler
X_prep = StandardScaler().fit_transform(X)

# Now, all features will have the same weight.
pd.DataFrame(X_prep).head()
```
**Clustering**

We will pick manually the number of clusters we want - let's set it to 8. Later we will discuss how many clusters should we have.

When randomness is involved (remember, K-means picks randomly the initial centroids), we better use a random seed so that we can reproduce our results. We can set this directly to the argument random_state.

```python

# Clustering:
from sklearn.cluster import KMeans

kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=8, random_state=1234)
kmeans.fit(X_prep)

```

We have run the model - now what? We can explore the clusters assigned to each observation:

```python

# Predicting / assigning the clusters:
clusters = kmeans.predict(X_prep)

# Check the size of the clusters
pd.Series(clusters).value_counts().sort_index()

# Explore the cluster assignment in the original dataset
X_df = pd.DataFrame(X)
X_df["cluster"] = clusters
X_df.head()

```

Before going into a deep exploration, we should think about the clustering itself. 

Go to the documentation page of Kmeans and discuss the parameters with your students:
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.cluster.KMeans.html

**init**: those are the different initialization strategies. By default, sklearn is already using a 'smart' method, not the totally random one we saw.

**n_init:** By default, Scikit-Learn has tried 10 different random initializations and kept the best model.

How does Scikit-Learn know which model is the best? It uses a performance metric called **inertia**. It is the mean squared distance between each instance and its closest centroid. It's stored in the `inertia_` attribute of the model.

```python

kmeans.inertia_ # our 'performance metric' should be around 324350


```

**max_iter:** It iterates up to 300 times by default (those are the re-computing centroids iterations we saw earlier)

**tol:** Looks like this is a way to determine when to stop iterating (if the clusters have changed only veeeery slightly, we assume we have achieved 'convergence')

**algorithm:** There are variations in the implementation of most algorithms and K-Means is no exception. By default, we're using a 'smart' implementation called elkan.



For learning purposes, we will tweak the parameters to replicate the good ol' K-Means - a bit dumber than the Scikit-Learn, yes, but also the original.



```python

kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=8,
                init="random",
                n_init=3,  # try with 1, 4, 8, 20, 30, 100...
                max_iter=2,
                tol=0,
                algorithm="full",
                random_state=1234)
kmeans.fit(X_prep)
print(kmeans.inertia_)

```


#### :pencil2: Check for Understanding - Class activity/quick quiz

> :clock10: 20 min (+ 10 min Review)

<details>
  <summary> Click for Instructions: Activity 2 </summary>

Play with the parameters of kmeans and see how that affects the inertia result.

You can create for loops to try different combinations of parameters.

</details>

<details>
  <summary> Activity 2 solutions</summary>

```python

for n in [1, 5, 100]:
    for i in [2, 300]:
        for alg in ["full", "elkan"]:
            kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=8,
                    init="random", 
                    n_init=n,  # try with 1, 4, 8, 20, 30, 100...,
                    max_iter=i,
                    tol=0,
                    algorithm=alg,
                    random_state=1234)
            kmeans.fit(X_prep)
            print("n_init:", n, "| max_iter:", i, "| alg:", alg, "| inertia:", kmeans.inertia_)
```
---


:coffee: __BREAK__

---

### Lesson 3 key concepts
> :clock10: 20 min

- Silhouette Score
- Choosing K

<details>
<summary> Choosing K </summary>

We have used K=8 by default for now - but we know that 8 might not be the optimal numbner of clusters for our dataset. Having a metric like inertia, we can compute it for several K values and then use the "elbow method" to choose the best K.

We will now leave all other parameters with their default value, since it seems to work pretty well.

```python
K = range(2, 20)
inertia = []

for k in K:
    kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=k,
                    random_state=1234)
    kmeans.fit(X_prep)
    inertia.append(kmeans.inertia_)

import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
%matplotlib inline

plt.figure(figsize=(16,8))
plt.plot(K, inertia, 'bx-')
plt.xlabel('k')
plt.ylabel('inertia')
plt.xticks(np.arange(min(K), max(K)+1, 1.0))
plt.title('Elbow Method showing the optimal k')
```
There seems to be an elbow at k=3, and then a very slight one at k=10, but other than that the plot is quite smooth. What if our business needs involv having a k between 5 and 8?

There is another metric that will help us decide.

<details>
<summary> Silhouette Score </summary>

Inertia is the metric that Scikit-Learn optimizes, but it does not have a limited range and that makes it difficult to evaluate.

There's a metric called [Silhouette Score](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silhouette_(clustering)) that also measures how similar is an observation is to its own cluster compared to other clusters. For the *i*th observation, the Silhouette Score is:

`(b - a) / max(a,b)`

Where:

`a` = mean intra-cluster distance (the average distance between *i* and every other observation in the cluster where *i* belongs)

`b` = mean nearest-cluster distance (the average distance between *i* and the observations of the nearest cluster that *i* is not part of)

The silhouette score for the whole model is the average of all the silhouette scores of each instance.

Because we divide the substraction of (b-a) by the max of the two distances (which will always be b unless the observation has been wrongly assigned to a cluster it should not belong), we obtain a "normalized score", that ranges from -1 to 1, and that makes it easier to interpret.


```python
K = range(2, 20)
silhouette = []

for k in K:
    kmeans = KMeans(n_clusters=k,
                    random_state=1234)
    kmeans.fit(X_prep)
    silhouette.append(silhouette_score(X_prep, kmeans.predict(X_prep)))


plt.figure(figsize=(16,8))
plt.plot(K, silhouette, 'bx-')
plt.xlabel('k')
plt.ylabel('silhouette score')
plt.xticks(np.arange(min(K), max(K)+1, 1.0))
plt.title('Elbow Method showing the optimal k')
```

Here, we confirm that 3 is the best option, but we also notice that 5 a quite good - it meets the 'technical criteria' of having a better score than its predecessor (4), so if it falls within the range of our business demands - it looks like the best candidate.


</details>


---

#### :pencil2: Check for Understanding - Class activity/quick quiz
> :clock10: 10 min (+ 10 min Review)

<details>
  <summary> Click for Instructions: Activity 3 </summary>

xxxxx

</details>

<details>
  <summary>Click for Solution: Activity 3 solutions</summary>

```python

```

</details>

---

:coffee: __BREAK__

---

### Lesson 4 key concepts
> :clock10: 20 min

- Exploring the clusters

<details>
  <summary> Scraped info into a dataframe </summary>

Once you have clusters, it's time to see how they segmented your data.

```python
TBD
```

</details>


### :pencil2: Practice on key concepts - Lab
> :clock10: 30 min 

<details>
  <summary> Click for Instructions: Lab </summary>

It's the moment to perform clustering on the songs you collected. Remember that the ultimate goal of this little project is to improve the recommendations of artists. Clustering the songs will allow the recommendation system to limit the scope of the recommendations to only songs that belong to the same cluster - songs with similar audio features.

The experiments you did with the Spotify API and the Billboard web scraping will allow you to create a pipeline such that when the user enters a song, you:

1. Check whether or not the song is in the Billboard Hot 200.
2. Collect the audio features from the Spotify API.

Then you want to send the Spotify audio features of the submitted song to the clustering model, which should return a cluster number.

We want to have as many songs as possible to create the clustering model, so we will the songs you collected to a bigger dataset available on kaggle containing 160 thousand songs.

```python
TBD
```

</details>

<details>
  <summary>Click for Solution: Lab solutions</summary>

```python
TBD
```

</details>

---

:sandwich: __LUNCH BREAK__

---