- How the K-Means works? It follows these steps:

1. Randomly assign a number, from 1 to K, to K observations. Those are going to be the initial _centroids_.
2. Assign each observation to its closest centroid (where _closest_ is defined using Euclidean distance).
3. Iterate until the cluster assignments stop changing (or until you reach a pre-defined threshold):
   a) For each of the K clusters, re-compute the cluster _centroid_ (the *k*th cluster centroid is the vector of the _p_ feature means for the observations in the *k*th cluster).
   b) Assign each observation to the cluster whose centroid is closest

- Discuss the questions:

   - Because K-Means does not know the "optimal" centroids and has to search for them starting at random spots, you might need many iterations to be completely sure it found the best possible centroids. That makes the algorithm slow and sometimes not consistent (unless you specify a Random Seed, you might get different clusters every time you run your code). Fortunately, smart people came up with several Centroid Initialization methods that speed up the model and mitigate the risks of getting sub-optimal centroids. We'll look at them later!
   - Business requirements usually determine the acceptable range of clusters: if your marketing department wants to do a clustering task for sending different targeted campaigns, they might have budget for creating up to 5 campaigns. Even if there's a super clear elbow at K=11, good luck trying to convince them to double the efforts... The elbow plot is still useful: it might show that even if K=11 seems to be the best pick, K=4 is a better pick than K=5. This is an example of why a data scientist has to understand to the needs of the business and be able to communicate with / convince non-technical people.